All right, good morning.
A very brief word since we haven't mentioned it yet.
We had our couples lab, the marriage workshop yesterday.
And it was wonderful.
If you were part of that, either attending it, you can probably attest to this.
But I just simply want to say thank you to actually the many workers who made it possible, and specifically call out Val Hunt and Laura Franklin.
who jumped in and were tremendously helpful.
These are two servants of the church who made that possible.
So thank you, thank you.
As we get started here, today's sermon is about Pharisees.
And I asked my son on the way to church today.
I was like, do you think it'd be weird if I just like asked the congregation to jump in and like and answer a question.
And he said, Dad, you do you.
And I said, okay.
I think I will.
So you tell me, I actually thought about forcing all of you people in the back row to come on up here.
One of these days I will.
You tell me one word, two words, three words max.
What makes a Pharisee a Pharisee?
Legalism.
Self-righteous.
holier than now.
Closed-minded.
Loud?
Say louder.
Be a Pharisee.
Anybody else before we jump in here?
I like that one.
Lack of self-reflection.
What did you say?
That's true.
You cheated.
It was loud.
All right.
I had here just kind of off, you know, just a few judgmental, hypocritical.
There's certain that the right prideful is a big one.
But maybe what you didn't say and where I need us to go first before we can then get back to that other side is to recognize a few things you might not expect to say about Pharisees, which is that many of them like try to be good, good people.
They try to be good people.
They do a lot for their synagogues or church.
They take their faith very seriously, very seriously.
They memorize scripture and they know it better than you probably know your scripture, to be honest with you.
They use their scripture regularly and they strive to read it very closely and keep every letter of the law because they're serious about it.
They are tithers, they pray,
They even fast.
Do you do that, right?
And so maybe what I'd say is if this describes you, there's a chance you might be a Pharisee.
One last question before we pray and get started.
Who is Jesus more likely to enjoy the company of?
The Pharisees or the sinners?
Pharisees or the sinners?
Who do you find him with and enjoying the company of more often?
The sinners, right?
I think that's undisputed.
Maybe someone wants to dispute that, but I think it's undisputed that Jesus is spending the majority of his time, at least the times where he's laughing and having a good time, not with the church people, but with the sinners.
And I think that's worthy of your reflection, mind too, like why of all people who comes, Jesus comes and spends time with them.
All right, before we get into the sermon itself, we should probably pray.
It's gonna be an interesting one.
Father in heaven.
Lord, each of us has a heart that is exposed to you right now, whether we realize it or not.
You can see right down to the smallest parts of who we are.
And God, some of us come this morning with some heart hearts, impenetrable hearts, hearts of Pharisees.
This is what we're worried about today.
This is what we're talking about today.
And so God, shine your light on those places.
Show us, each of us, where we are the Pharisee, that we might repent and change our ways.
In Christ's name we pray, amen.
We are, as I talked about last week, in some ways like we're going through
Well, we are going through the soils of the parable of the sower.
I'm not gonna go over the parable again.
But if you recall, it has four soils to it, right?
It has the path which is compacted and the seed falls onto it and then the birds just come and they eat it up, right?
It's just like, it can't penetrate into the ground.
And then there's the rocky soil, remember?
And the roots start down in the soil
But then it just can't go that deep.
And eventually the sun scorches it up and it goes away.
And then there's the thorny situation, which may not be the soil itself, but it's like the environment around the soil.
And so the plant starts to grow up, but it can't get the
breath it needs and it can't grow like it should because it gets choked out and so it doesn't produce the fruit that it should and then the last soil is the the good soil and this is the one that produces fruit in abundance and it has 30 times, 60 times, 100 times what you might expect it to produce right and and of course we're going for good soil but over these
I kind of want to take a look at each of these and then pinpoint what they look like in real life, in your life and in my life.
And my guess is each of us has a little bit of each of these soils inside of us.
And so it's not like you can say, oh, well, this is this guy's problem.
And that's her problem.
No, every one of us needs to do some of this inner work.
And then of course, the theme of the year is all of this leads to transformation, right?
And so as we do some of this inner work today, we are looking at what has to be the most dangerous problem that I think I see in all of the New Testament, and that is this hard soil.
And I do believe that as Jesus is telling this parable and that as he's talking to the crowds, he has in mind the Pharisees.
the religious elites of his day, the people who attend church regularly and do all the right church things, and yet somehow the seed, the word, it doesn't penetrate, it doesn't start to even grow roots, it goes nowhere.
As I was sitting prepping for this sermon, I was trying to figure out like, all right, what do I name this sermon?
I was imagining not only like compacted soil, but like it's coming over it and like paving over it with a thick, you know, bit of asphalt, right?
Like, and as I'm sitting there thinking like, man, some people's hearts, they're not just compacted down.
They're paved over.
And this is a desperate situation, right?
And I what should I call this sermon?
And then I don't know why, but the song just popped in my head.
You know this song?
They pay for it.
You know, don't make me sing it.
This is Joni Mitchell, the big yellow taxi.
Some of you younger people may not know this.
Yeah, you're shaking your heads no.
That's fine, understandable.
And then after hers, Amy Grant, right, sings a version of this.
The counting crows come along and sing this.
Are we all on the same page here?
Okay.
They paved paradise and put up a parking lot with a pink hotel, a boutique, and a swinging hotspot.
Don't it always seem to go?
You don't know what you got till it's gone.
What?
They paved paradise and put up a parking lot.
Right?
You know the song, right?
OK, the song is not really about hard hearts.
And yet, in some ways, the pastor, preacher in me loves to turn something into something here.
And so as the song is like playing in my head, I'm thinking about the nature of our hearts and what God's trying to do in there.
And it's supposed to be a paradise.
It's supposed to be this thing that grows in abundance.
It's supposed to be maybe even like an Eden kind of paradise where there's Shalom or peace.
There's like unity with God happening in there.
There's like an abundance that you then feed other people with.
It's this kind of paradise.
And the Pharisees and God forbid you and I
We pave over that.
Our passage today, we already read it.
I want to read it again.
So we'll go ahead and show it up here.
If you want to turn there, it's Luke 18, 9 to 14.
We're actually going to end up looking at a few passages.
And truth be told, I was kind of so into this.
I thought we could do a lot of things about how not to be a Pharisee.
Right, because there are so many interactions where Jesus bumps into these people and he keeps having trouble with the Pharisees, right?
And why?
Like why are they so unreceptive?
And then how can we make sure that we are not like this?
So let's start with Luke 18, nine to 14 and we'll read it together and we'll see right up front
one of the main problems that's happening.
So Jesus tells this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and they treated others with contempt.
You see that just the first verse, we've already got two big problems.
What are they?
Self-righteous, which that came up in our diagnosis of the Pharisees.
And then what's the other one, contempt, right?
Maybe it's like a judgmentalism.
They're looking at other people contemptuously.
Interestingly, if you were here yesterday for the marriage workshop, there's four horsemen of the apocalypse, apparently, in your relationships.
And the worst of them, the worst of them, is contempt.
And if you hold contempt for your spouse, good luck in marriage.
Well, it's not all that different.
with other relationships.
And so the Pharisees, what do they do?
They look at other people and they hold contempt for them.
And so you've got to ask yourself, if you're experiencing some of that in your life, again, you might be a Pharisee.
So he tells the parable, verse 10, two men went to the temple to pray, one's a Pharisee and the other's the tax collector, the sinner.
The Pharisee standing by himself prayed thus, God, I thank you that I am not like other men.
You know, those extortioners, the unjust, those adulterers, or even that guy over there, the tax collector.
I lie fast twice a week.
And I give tithes of all that I get.
But then in the other corners, tax collector standing far off, he wouldn't even lift his eyes to heaven.
Instead, he beat his breasts, he's crying out, and he's saying, God, be merciful to me.
I know that I'm a sinner.
I tell you this man went down to his house justified
He was actually made righteous by God rather than the Pharisee.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbleds himself will be exalted.
So what words describe the Pharisee here?
Pride, judgmentalism, he is contemptuous, he is self-righteous.
But let me suggest one more thing that he also is.
He's ignorant.
He doesn't know it, right?
He doesn't know that he's walking away from this scene, not made righteous and yet needs to be.
The tax collector, of course, he is made righteous.
And it's because he knows it.
He knows he needs it.
And so he's doing what?
He's doing that inner work.
He's looking inside and he's saying, I am a messed up human being.
I have sinned before God and God have mercy on me.
I need you.
The tax collector doesn't seem to need God and instead is able to perhaps even play God.
and say, this person needs God, the adult are over here, and this tax collector, he definitely needs God.
The extortioner over here definitely needs mercy, right?
But me, I think I'm all right.
I think I'm doing just fine.
Skip to another passage.
If you want to turn there, you're welcome to.
This one's from Mark chapter three.
I don't have them up on the board here.
Mark chapter three, one to six.
This is a passage that you might be familiar with where a man with a withered hand, right?
He's not able to use one of his hands.
He's in the synagogue on a Sunday or a Sabbath, Saturday, actually, for them.
But it's the Sabbath.
And you know, you're not supposed to work on the Sabbath.
And so Jesus goes in and what does he do?
He heals him.
And how do the Pharisees respond?
I say, shame, shame, shame.
You're working on the Sabbath.
You're breaking the law.
The law clearly says you are not supposed to do work on the Sabbath.
And now Jesus, look, you've done this terrible thing.
Jesus' response, I think, is wonderful here.
It's this really nice window into Jesus' inner life.
If at some point you wanna look at it, it's in verse five, I'll just read this part.
He says, Jesus looked around at them, and here he's looking at the Pharisees, and he looks at them with anger.
Anger.
Now it takes a lot to get Jesus angry.
But who are the people he's normally angry with when you see him angry in the gospels?
100% of the time, it's the religious folks.
He doesn't really get angry at the sinners out there.
He has mercy on them.
He has compassion for them.
He wants to save them.
He's reaching out to help them.
But the Pharisees, that's a different story.
So he is angered with them and he grieves at there, and here's our phrase, hardness of heart.
He's grieving at their hardness of heart.
So if your Christianity causes you to wonder if the healing of the world somehow bumps up against your version of the way the world should work or the way you read your scripture and you're not sure if you should help out in a certain situation because it goes against your moral compass, we'll say.
You might find yourself in this passage
in this Mark III Pharisee passage.
Just to give you a real world example here, a few years ago, we did a thing here at South Run with some other folks in the area called Raft, resettling Afghans together.
And one of the concerns was, well, these Afghan families who are coming from Afghanistan and they're fleeing the Taliban, and they're coming here with nothing.
in their pockets.
They're literally leaving everything behind, but they're Muslim, right?
So, I mean, should we help them?
Is that something we should really do or that might actually bump up against our moral compass of what we Christian?
Well, if that's your attitude and if that's your thought process, then I assure you, you're closer to the Pharisees of Mark three than you are to the Jesus of Mark three.
skipping to another passage, John 9, 13 to 34.
You can read it of your own core.
This is a lengthy story about a man who was born blind and the Pharisees are trying to figure out what's going on here.
Who sinned?
Was it this guy who sinned?
Was it his parents sinned?
And then Jesus is like, no, it doesn't work like that.
And then he heals him, right?
And then he heals the blind man.
And then the next question is, well, we know this Jesus guy and we know that it's the Sabbath that he's doing this on.
So surely this is not of God.
Like God wouldn't do it this way.
God wouldn't use a man like this and he wouldn't do it on the Sabbath.
And so we know that something's not right here.
That's the way the Pharisee thinks.
And here again, it's their biblicism bumping up against what's really happening in the world.
And they're saying to themselves, well, I know the God of the Bible, the one I read in the Bible anyway, and God wouldn't do this.
Turns out I think some of us do this on occasion as well.
We have these small preconceived notions
of where God is at work in the world.
And then when God works in other ways, we must think, well, that's clearly not God because God wouldn't do that.
Those people are either not deserving of it, maybe they're the wrong person or maybe it's the wrong institution or it's the wrong church or the wrong denomination or whatever it might be.
I would encourage you to think to yourself, well, maybe that's the way a Pharisee might think.
And to give you a real world example of this, I was surprised.
A number of three years ago, 2023, my school, as very college, where I went to college, had a revival.
And it was this really powerful thing where thousands of people come from across the globe and show up, and everybody's testifying that there's an outpouring happening.
And this is amazing, right?
Maybe you heard of it, maybe not.
And then I was a little surprised to see John MacArthur, well-respected pastor, questioning the veracity
of the movement itself.
And why?
Why would he do this?
He didn't doubt that something was happening.
He just said, well, this is a Wesleyan or Minnie in school.
And I don't know that the God of my small head is going to actually move there.
And so what does he do?
He says, well, I'm just not so sure that's real.
God doesn't work that way.
I would say,
That is not John MacArthur's most Christian moment.
Pharisees in their small world of certainty think they have the corner on the truth and so therefore need to shrink God down to their size and their expectations rather than letting God expand their minds and their hearts.
that might be the easiest way to describe a Pharisee, small minds and small hearts.
Matthew 23, 23 to 24, another example of how Pharisees think and how their hearts get hardened, because here Jesus is
talking to some Pharisees.
And if you've read Matthew 23, this is easily Jesus at his angriest.
And it's a whole chapter filled with woe to you Pharisees.
Look at what you're doing.
You are whitewashed tombs is what he says.
And he says, the whitewashed tombs, because out here, it looks white and bright and clean.
But inside of that tomb, inside of your heart, is something rotting.
and dead.
This.
This is what Pharisees looks like.
It looks like it's all put together out here, but inside is something different.
But in Matthew 23, 23, and 24, he's talking about the way that they tithe.
And he says to them, you tithe your mint.
Like, you know, if you've got a mint plant, right?
You tithe your dill.
Again,
dill plants, right?
You tie your herb garden.
You're willing to take 10% out of that arrow grow that's sitting in your basement, and you're bringing that to the church, and you're doing the smallest thing, right?
You're doing all the tithing, and he's saying, but you've forgotten the most important parts.
You've forgotten justice and mercy and faithfulness is what he says.
And if I could like recast this, we took tithes today.
And when we tithe, the goal is that it changes your heart, that it's not staying out here somewhere, that it's actually penetrating inside and changing you into a different kind of person.
A person who cares about justice and you
in order to make justice a reality in the world, who cares about mercy, in order to make mercy happen in the world, who cares about faithfulness, right?
That is what we're going for, changed hearts.
It was very easy to give, just to give.
I would remind you, Jesus continues and he says, keep tithing.
Don't stop that part.
But do the other part too.
Let it change who
You are.
Last passage, Luke 7, 29 to 30.
Jesus is talking again to a crowd of people, but the Pharisees are nearby.
And he says the following.
He says, when all the people heard this, what he was saying, the tax collectors are there too.
Man, they make a real impression here.
And they declared, God is just.
God is making all things right through this person, Jesus, because they were baptized with the baptism of John, and they were bought into the whole system.
But in verse 30, it goes on and it says, the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the purposes of God for themselves.
This might be the hardest line of all.
because the truth is this, that God actually wants those Pharisees to come to Him.
God wants those Pharisees to break the pavement of their hearts, to dust it up, and to plant bunches of seeds, and to become the people that He wants them to be, His designed them to be.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers, they reject the purpose of God for themselves.
So it turns out the Pharisee is the person, maybe you, maybe me, who has been to church your whole life.
And outwardly, you've played the part of the Christian.
You have tithed.
You have come on Sunday mornings.
You have read your Bible faithfully.
You have prayed your prayers.
You have a strong moral compass.
You crave certainty and do not do well with ambiguity.
You know who the sinners are and who the saints are, but despite all of the outer work that you've accomplished and can point to, an inner work has not occurred.
Your heart is as hard as the day you were baptized, maybe harder.
You know all the right theology
You know who's in and who's out of the kingdom.
You sit in judgment over others who need to get their act together rather than greet them with grace and mercy.
You are kind to people's faces, but behind their backs you scheme and plot.
You are concerned not only with your own righteousness, but in making sure everyone else knows you are righteous too.
You trade a heart of justice and mercy and faithfulness for religion that talks about those things but does nothing about it.
Rather than learning to love as Jesus loved, you have justified yourself and the contempt you feel toward others and you do so by quoting all the right scriptures.
If that sounds harsh, it should.
I will warn you of all the people Jesus meets in the gospels.
He has the harshest words for the hardhearted, for the Pharisees, for those who refuse to allow the seeds to penetrate the soil.
And so this is what hard soil looks like.
And God's redeeming word seems to have no chance in this soil.
because you don't need righteousness.
You've got your own.
And so the birds come and they eat those seeds right up.
The wind sweeps them away and the seed never produces the fruit that was always intended to produce.
You've paved over the paradise.
That is your heart.
So what's the antidote?
It's very simple.
Repentance.
A recognition of your hard heart, asking God to break it, to show you your impenetrable ways, to take a sledgehammer to the paved over paradise that God is wanting to grow within you.
I assure you, it is not too late.
I encourage you to make a commitment today to live with the tenderness of heart that God is calling all of us toward.
Let us pray.
Jesus, I worry that in the same ways the Pharisees pushed away your hard words, that the very people who need to hear this hard word will push it away.
But God, I would ask that in your mercy for that person, that you take the sledgehammer to their
that you begin to do the hard work of tilling up that hard soil.
God, as you do, it will be deeply uncomfortable.
But on the other side of all that is a softness, a tenderness of heart, a soil that is capable of growing new life, new life that the Pharisee can't even imagine, new life
It will feel right.
It will feel like Shalom.
It will feel like the Garden of Eden.
It will be union with you.
It will be the ability to feed the masses, the fruit that you are producing in that person.
God, do not let us leave today without taking the magic to the parts of our heart, but a heart that needs to be broken.
That's what Jesus told him.